How pregnancy makes people more law-abiding


[![20200104-woc798.png](https://i.postimg.cc/Gt4dJDR8/20200104-woc798.png)](https://postimg.cc/D439788n)


Almost any parent will agree that once you have a child, life is never
quite the same again. Having to provide for another, utterly dependent,
human being can spur new mums and dads to find reserves of generosity,
care and energy they never knew they had. Their behaviour changes before
the birth, too. A paper entitled “Family formation and crime”, published
in February 2020 by Maxim Massenkoff and Evan Rose, two economics PhD
students at the University of California, Berkeley, suggests that before
a child is born, the prospect of impending parenthood makes people much
more law-abiding.

Using data on more than 1m babies born in Washington state between 1996
and 2009, and records of thousands of crimes committed there between
1992 and 2015, the authors find that when women become pregnant, they
are much less likely to be arrested, for a wide range of crimes. The
effect is most marked for “economic” crimes, such as theft and burglary,
but is also true of assaults, vandalism, and alcohol and drug offences.
Arrest rates fall by 50% almost as soon as women become pregnant and
fall much further as the pregnancy goes on. Although they bounce back
somewhat after childbirth, arrest rates stabilise at about half
pre-pregnancy levels.


More surprisingly, the same pattern holds for fathers. Men are much
likelier than women to commit crimes of all sorts in the first place,
and the decline in some types of crime is less dramatic for dads than
for mums. But arrest rates drop by around 25% once their partners become
pregnant, and stay around this mark even after birth. In a blog post
commenting on the paper, Alexander Tabarrok of George Mason University
described the effect as “astoundingly large”. A study by Mr Tabarrok
published in 2007 concluded that the threat of an additional 20 years of
prison made criminals 17% less likely to reoffend; the prospect of
fatherhood, it seems, is more salutary than that of two decades of
incarceration.

Alas, Mr Massenkoff and Mr Rose also reach other, less encouraging,
conclusions. Arrests of men for domestic violence soar immediately after
birth. The authors suggest this may be because new parents are living
together for the first time. Whatever the cause, for some, parenthood
can bring misery as well as joy.