- letter::
    - Status:: #PUBLISHED
    - Published Date:: [[October 13th, 2020]]
- Hello fellow Roamans,
- It’s been several weeks since my last letter - I’m interested to know if you like this twice-monthly schedule? Does it feel too long since the last one, with all that happens in the Roaman community? Let me know!
- Tomorrow, I’m excited to be recording a bonus conversation with Tracy Winchell about my Roam journaling practices. If you’ve [signed up to Tracy’s journaling course](https://rebootspodcast.podia.com/roaman-journaling-course/vrpq4), I expect you’ll see it in the bonus area in the next couple of weeks. I'd also like to take this opportunity to thank those who emailed me after my impromptu email where I talked about my own journaling story. It seemed to resonate with many of you.
- In this letter, I’ll be covering how I use the delta ∆ feature in Roam to live a more intentional life by programming my attention. Plus, I explore some new community contributions and dive into a few of the more interesting conversations in the RoamCult community.
- # Around the Roaman Empire
    - Since the Roam team are now more regularly emailing updates out about the changes in Roam, I have decided I will focus less on covering what’s been released. Instead, I’ll try to curate and commentate a little more on the conversations and contributions of the RoamCult community. I’ll act as a guide to find and highlight practices and workflows that can help everyone as we feel our way in this brave new world of networked thought.
    - There's a couple of new "people-to-watch" I wanted to highlight. First is [[Dharam Kapila]] [*](https://twitter.com/DharamKapila), who's recently released a new Chrome extension for Roam, which he calls [Roam Portal](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/roam-portal/kgkmjbhbdakcdfkkgmmihcceekcdmefe). It is a fantastic tool which lets you explore your database more visually, for example, you can find your most frequently used words from the last month. It also enables you to perform more advanced searches. For example, you can “include similarly spelt words” to catch where you may have misspelt something.
    - Second is [[David Vargas]] [*](https://twitter.com/dvargas92495), who is cranking out wondrous Roam extensions at a blistering pace. You can find out everything he has to offer at [https://roamjs.com](https://roamjs.com/) where each extension is well documented to install and use. A couple of the most notable ones are “Attr Tables”, which adds the ability to sort your attribute tables; and “Query tools” which enable you to sort the results of your queries. It also includes a handy little feature to instead select one or more random results. I am planning to experiment more with that in conjunction with ∆ to surface random blocks, for example, a daily passage from [[Marcus Aurelius]]' [[Meditations]] to contemplate in my journaling practice.
- # Thinking Out Loud
    - ## Programmable Attention
        - Over the weekend, [[Ian Tay]] [*](https://twitter.com/iantay_) published a [blog post about the ∆ feature in Roam.](https://www.iantay.dev/post/beyond-spaced-repetition-%CE%B4-in-roam-research/) I’ve been working on an article about it myself which I published last night. In it, I detail my experiments over the past six weeks showing you how I use it as part of my journaling practice, how to implement recurring tasks and checklists and how I resurface my notes for review. I also show you how I use it to maintain The Discipline. A framework for how I use my available time more intentionally. Once you understand how ∆ works, my hope is that it will birth further ideas on how it can be used to enhance your daily life. [[post/Programming your attention with Roam Research and ∆]] [*](https://elaptics.co.uk/journal/roam-research-programmable-attention/). I'd love to hear any feedback you may have.
    - ## Augmentation over Automation
        - Another significant contribution to the community from the last few weeks is RoamNERd. As I write this letter, the website [roamnerd.com](https://roamnerd.com) isn’t working, which is a convenient front-end to the command-line tools. For those who are unfamiliar, RoamNERd does what’s called [Named Entity Recognition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Named-entity_recognition) (the NER of nerd) on your unstructured text. Feed it your documents, and it will pull out and create backlinks to known entities within them, which you can then import into your Roam database.
        - While this is a great effort which should be applauded, it does raise other questions which [[Conor White-Sullivan]] termed [[Augmentation over Automation]]. Roam is designed as a tool for thought. That is, it’s designed to help you think, not to do it for you. We have to be careful and think about how we might be applying these kinds of tools. Part of the value for me in Roam is how it helps __me__ to make connections. I can only do that by doing the work. Overlinking (generating too many links automatically), may cause the opposite of the desired effect. It’s a similar argument where people want to remove case-sensitivity in their links. Apple and apple can be very different things. Without your own curation, and leaning more heavily on automatic tools like RoamNERd, there’s a risk that your backlinks will become saturated with noise that becomes too effortful to process. As our Roam databases get bigger, we must become aware of the impact that graph “pollution” may have.
        - However, there are also clear cases for tools like myMind, which is an automated AI attempt to automatically tag content for you. It’s excellent for the Librarians who want to capture everything, just in case, to satisfy their collector tendencies. And I don’t think there’s anything wrong with this per se. But, if you really want to learn and understand things, that takes time for you to cogitate and form your own thoughts and opinions on. To do that effectively, you need tools like Roam to augment it, not automate it. It leads us on to another aspect of this debate.
    - ### Progressive Summarization
        - I took part in the latest cohort of Building a Second Brain ([[BASB]]) during September and Roam was a popular choice in the cohort as a second brain. In the community, and on Twitter, there's been much talk about whether it's better to copy the entire source text of articles and materials into Roam in order to facilitate future searches, or whether it's better to only bring in highlights or already progressively summarised material. ([[Progressive Summarization]] [*](https://fortelabs.co/blog/progressive-summarization-a-practical-technique-for-designing-discoverable-notes/) is a technique that forms part of Tiago Forte's curriculum in BASB.)
        - There’s also a further debate as to whether [[Progressive Summarization]] is an appropriate technique in our arsenal of tools. There’s no clear consensus, but there seems to be a distinct divide between those who are academically-oriented and other more general knowledge workers. However, my own take is that there’s a middle ground between the two sides. BASB suggests progressively summarising your documents over time and only reaching a summary for the select few of the very best notes. I don’t entirely agree and side more with the academics where you need to interact more than merely layering on highlights. I think this mini-summary layer needs to be done with far more of your input material. As I’ve described in other articles on my website, I do this via Readwise. It resurfaces my highlights and marginalia several times. Each time it’s resurfaced, I review and add additional layers of progressive summarization. But I also add to or edit my own original thoughts and notes as I discover additional insights or make new connections. I’ll also add tags as seems appropriate. Only then, does it make its way into Roam.
        - This workflow also helps me to more easily identify what material comes from others, and my own original thinking when I’m in Roam. It’s helping me to generate insights and solidify my ideas far more than I’ve ever been able to do in the past.
        - What is your stance? If you have any thoughts, on this or other tools-for-thought related topics, hit reply and tell me. I read every email and I now look forward to my email each day and love having email conversations with you all.
