- letters::
    - Status:: [[status/PUBLISHED]]
    - Published Date:: [[December 22nd, 2020]]
- Hello Roamans,
Welcome to the final letter of 2020. What a year it's been! I don't think any of us could have foreseen what's transpired. While it has been terrible time for many, it's also worth realising that we are still here, and still able to fight another day.
- 2020 has been an interesting year, for many of us we've discovered Roam Research and through it, many life-changing experiences. At the beginning of this year, I would never have imagined creating a Roam course that now well over a thousand people have taken, plus literally hundreds of emails thanking me. On top of that, I've also started writing these letters because, through #RoamCult, I have had the privilege to meet and interact with exceedingly smart and kind people across the world and it's my small way of giving something back. For that, I am truly grateful.
- This edition will be a little different to usual. In the spirit of reflection, I have a more in-depth wrap-up of Roam Book Club 2 as I got a chance to catch up with [[Matt McKinlay]] and reflect a little with him about how it went.
- # Around the Roaman Empire
    - First though, let's quickly review what's been happening:
    - Roam has released several new features which promise some interesting use-cases for the future. I'm excited to see what people use them for.
        - [[Telescoping text]]. If you wrap text in double parentheses as if you were going to create a new block from it but then move off the menu item, Roam will toggle it behind the Roam astrolobe glyph. Clicking the double-brackets of the text will collapse the text - clicking the glyph will expand it. It suggests a nice new interaction model, which coupled with some CSS styling could open new possibilities for footnotes, citations, and so on. ((If you have or see some good examples in the wild - let me know.))
            - A short video by [[Conor White-Sullivan]] demonstrating it https://twitter.com/RoamResearch/status/1338741084256669699
        - Under the hood, Roam have been making some extensive changes to allow us greater control for how we can use [[roam/js]] and [[roam/css]] to further customise our Roam environments. I would recommend watching Conor's video if you're interested to see what's now possible.
            - https://twitter.com/RoamResearch/status/1338735622375272448
    - The latest Roam Hangout featured my friend [[Tracy Winchell]] discussing journaling in Roam. I had a poorly internet connection so unfortunately I couldn't attend but [[Roamhacker]]'s live tweets kept me connected ((https://twitter.com/roamhacker/status/1340062581181083649)). If you're interested in journaling with Roam but you don't know where to start, Tracy has a [great course on the topic](https://rebootspodcast.podia.com/roaman-journaling-course/vrpq4) but she has also announced a [free January Journaling Challenge](https://roamanjournals.com/january2021) to help get you started. It'll begin and end with group coaching calls and you'll get an email each week with some prompts and ideas for creating habits to keep it up.
    - [[Beau Haan]]'s Roam Tour with [[Robert Haisfield]] on his Zettelkasten technique in Roam has been causing a big stir.
        - https://twitter.com/RobertHaisfield/status/1338586882079248389
        - He also followed it up with a live-stream showing how he uses it. He created a 100-tweet thread for @threadapalooza on zettelkasten without writing a single new word. He only used what he's already written in his zettelkasten.
            - {{[[youtube]]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jigRsdBrc7I&feature=youtu.be}}
        - As you may know, Beau and I are working together to figure out how to share this unique zettelkasten practice more widely.
        - We have thrown up a quick page where you can [register your interest](https://chestnut.network/) if you'd like to learn more, and it's where we'll keep you up to date and solicit your feedback. We really think that done properly, it's a transformational practice which has the power to transform your life.
- # Roam Book Club 2
    - The second Roam Book Club finished last week. Over the previous 6 weeks we read [[book/How to take smart notes]] by [[Sönke Ahrens]] and took notes in a shared graph.
    - Overall, it was a great experience. As individuals, and as a group, I think we learned a lot as we collectively explored the ideas in Sönke's book and figured out how to build a zettelkasten for ourselves and as a group.
    - I got a chance to sit down and reflect on our experiences with [[Matt McKinlay]], who works on the support team at Roam and masterfully guided us through the process.
    - ---
    - This is the first time I've done an interview and I'm keen that this email isn't a 20 minute read so I've tried to condense the key points we talked about. I've tried to keep Matt's words his own (in block quotes) but I've edited or omitted some parts for brevity.
    - ### Differences between the first book club and the second one
        - I didn't take part in the first book club so I was curious how it had changed this time around. Matt told me the first was more conversation-based, and they tried templates for people to fill out, but often without dedicated time to write people would not get around to doing it so the graph would have "ghost" blocks. There were more guest speakers in the first book club, however, since not everyone had read the book, some of the context was lost.
        - The first book was more of a concept book whilst How to take smart notes is more closely aligned to what Roam does with note-taking, and of course the second book club was bigger.
        - Both graphs have been somewhat messy, but it was clear during the first book club that some shared norms, or terminology was necessary.
    - ### On Finishing
        - While the book club is over, did we finish? We're not sure.
        - In the first book club, they read the book one chapter per week so it was really clear when it was the end since the book had been read. In the second book club, we read it in phases, following the books process. We spent the first few weeks doing fleeting notes, then literature notes, before finally moving on to create permanent notes/zettels.
        - For me, it didn't feel that we'd quite completed the process because we didn't really get to connecting the notes; though as we acknowledged figuring out how best to do that in a shared graph is particularly challenging. Typically, a zettelkasten is a very personal thing.
        - > I don't even feel like I got to the zettel stage at a personal level with the book. You know, I spent 20 hours on the book map, and I feel it gave me a really specific understanding of the book, and I'm now kind of ready for the next step. But I just didn't want to get to that bit and then have to go back later. I feel I've got steps one and two really done. And and for that reason, I probably I feel like everyone's a little bit like that, that we're not quite done.
    - ### Book Club Format & Experimentation
        - The overriding approach they're taking with the book club is one of iteration and experimentation.
        - > I feel like from book club one to book club two, the standards are becoming clearer. The distinctive characteristics of what the live sessions are becoming more obvious, and I still think there's a lot to improve, but it'll get more fun, as everyone knows the format.
        - > The cohort thing is important or at least the deadlines. I think deadlines rule the world, and in some way they certainly do with these type of difficult extracurricular activities. It's not like watching TV or going to movies where you can just actually go and relax. Reading a book takes effort. And for that reason, there's some different characteristics of it, particularly over a six week period. It's kind of like signing up for a gym membership, everyone's enthusiastic at the start, and then the actual work of it kind of kicks in.
        - We discussed the importance of making sure the book club is accessible to fit with the demands of everyone's lives
        - > Trying to organise for that, and trying to make the bar low enough that people still feel they can jump in at any time because I think that's important, right? If you've missed a week, it's supposed to be social, so if you can only make one of four weeks, then that's still better than zero and, and hopefully, you get enough energy from the one week that it's enough to bring you back to the next one.
        - However, __"the idea of the live session is really important for people to find a deadline in their week to make time for it."__
        - > I tried to make the session a little bit about writing so it's not all just ephemeral talk, there's some documentation that afterwards might be enough to trigger people to start thinking, "Okay, well, I'll go back and see what I wrote."
        - Without the personal experience of the first book club, I can't directly comment but I certainly appreciated having the guidance of the agenda with a mix of quieter time to write and reflect, answering prompts or questions followed by the breakout rooms to discuss further in small groups. I also enjoyed listening to guest speakers like [[Sönke Ahrens]] himself, [[Dharam Kapila]], [[Luca Dellana]], [[Mike Kramer]] and [[Beau Haan]] on related, but practical, topics too.
    - ### Our biggest take-aways from the book club
        - I asked Matt what his biggest take-away was:
        - > Firstly I enjoy reading books in the graph more than I do via my Kindle. Having Sönke's book in the graph and being able to block reference from it, and then track the lineage of the zettel process, or even the literature notes, that was a big revelation. It felt quite important as a milestone in how I use Roam for reading. My traditional method is going through Readwise and exploring from Kindle, but increasingly, I'm going to try and find books that are native to Roam because I just think it unlocks way more stuff that you can do with the book.
        - I too loved having the whole book in the graph. Being able to block reference a section, and then use the text with alias function to be able to quickly trim, bold or highlight a specific phrase or sentence to build on was great. I am a little conflicted about this though. In my own graph I don't bring across full articles I read, only the highlights I've taken along with my own comments. Until the recent block quote updates, it was often tricky with just "vanilla" Roam to know if a block out of context was your own words or someone else's. In a shared graph, having the whole text available feels more important and useful because it provides an easier way to orient yourself and with Roam's inline references, it's such a powerful way to see what others made of the same piece.
        - > I like the feeling of being able to create your own idea and then track it right back to the source of where you were interested in and see that; it feels something different to other note-taking apps like Word or Scrivener.
        - For me I think that we all got a lot more out of that than maybe we expected. The biggest revelation that I think was really interesting was seeing that from the same source material just how different  people's takes on it were. The combination of the source, your own experience and ideas and prior knowledge constructed so many different   literature notes and permanent notes.
        - It's some thoughtful insight on actually what everyone's doing when they talk about notes, something fundamental that we've been doing for 25 years since school. Writing stuff down, whatever happens to it, is it important or all of that stuff? ... It feels like you don't get that from just reading a book by yourself
        - It has really cemented in my mind the need to read books for yourself to first create your own insights based on your prior knowledge and experience. Book summaries written by others are helpful to solidify your own understanding afterwards, but the book club has shown me another way where the granularity of the blocks take that to another level.
        - Overall, for me, it's been a really interesting process seeing how the graph evolved as we progressed. It has really been a very meta experience in so many ways. As Joey Harris said in the final call we read a book about how to do a thing while simultaneously trying to do the thing. On top of that we are simultaneously trying to figure out how to do that as a collective, unstructured group. As we joked in the session, it wasn't just a Zettelkasten we were building it was a "Metakasten"!
    - ### On stewardship
        - One interesting aspect of our conversation was how Matt viewed his stewardship of the book club.
        - > Firstly, to actually stick to the ideas of the book, to work inductively from the bottom up and not have this overarching __"this is how it's gonna work and how it's going to be, and this is where we're going"__ but instead just to see what happens and accumulate evidence [...] There's a lot of optionality in the graph, which makes it very difficult to control. And for those reasons, you need someone to be quite passive in directing it, if it's too authoritative, or directed, that could go wrong. So I'm really just trying to be delicate, and err on the side of being slow to act and allowing people to make mistakes, to see what works and what doesn't.
        - Matt thought some of the most exciting things to come out of this iteration is seeing how people have taken over the daily notes, or creating CSS, and so on. While he felt that might be a bit frustrating for some people, it really is trying to follow the ideas of the book
        - > to really let things kind of emerge as opposed to start out and create a false dawn
        - I personally think he did a great job of gentle guidance and giving people the space to explore:
        - > ...that's definitely been my style with this. It's too big and I've thought through this a lot. The alternative is, okay, so I'm going to come out and just say how it's going to be done. And the problem with that is if it goes wrong, then what do you do? Do you become punitive, and just say to people, hey, no you're doing it a different way than what I've said. It could get really messy, so I think there's like, a real delicate thing about just giving people space to explore, and, and wearing the consequences of looking like you're too passive, as opposed to the opposite.
My mindset has absolutely been to surface as much error as possible, and in that process hopefully surface a few things that are not errors. Then, try and wipe out the errors for the next one, reset, and do the good things well...
    - ### What does the future of the book club look like?
        - As of the time of our chat, they [the Roam team] don't quite know yet. They're taking the next few weeks to discuss what the next iterations will look like. At the end of the last live session call Matt briefly outlined a potential vision of facilitating 1000 book clubs running in shared graphs, but they don't want to jump too far ahead yet, for now Matt feels like the best North Star to guide them is to acknowledge we're still exploring. He really wanted to emphasise that we're in a frontier phase of looking at what the future of book clubs could be, as well as what multiplayer looks like when we collectively read and take notes together. The goal is to simply __"explore as much as possible, and to interact with as many people who are smart and intelligent, and who can show us things that we didn't know"__.
        - For me, Matt's last point sums up my book club experience perfectly. There are very few places where you get to hang out with such a diverse and interesting group of people who are smart and intelligent and genuinely a joy to be around. Somehow, there's something about this tool, Roam Research, which acts like a flame to attract these curious and kind moths. And as we found during one of the live sessions there was a collective sense of all of us feeling like we were the stupidest person on the call.
            - https://twitter.com/elaptics/status/1328101704160714752
    - ---
    - If this has whet your appetite, then you should definitely [sign up for the next book club](https://matt52.typeform.com/to/hIoUNmj9) which will start in January -- and I'll see you there!
    - I also highly recommend [following Matt on Twitter](https://twitter.com/RaygunIcecream). He recently started an excellent Threadapalooza thread recapping the first book club, which he plans to continue covering book club 2, which I'm really looking forward to reading.((https://twitter.com/RaygunIcecream/status/1339959178937335809))
- Thanks for your attention this year, I hope you've enjoyed reading my letters. My inbox is always open for your thoughts and suggestions for improvement or criticism. I read every one, even if I can't reply to everything, I love getting to chat with smart Roamans.
- I hope you all get to kick back and relax over the next few weeks, however you might choose to celebrate. I wish you, and your family the very best and I'm looking forward to next year. 2021 for us Roamans is going to be very exciting!
