- letter::
    - Status:: #PUBLISHED
    - Published Date:: [[October 27th, 2020]]
- Hello again, fellow Roamans,
I'll start this letter the same as the last: tomorrow, I’m having a part-two conversation with [[Tracy Winchell]] of Roaman Journals fame. We had a great chat about my Roam journaling practices which went so fast, we decided to do a part two to delve into the HEART check technique using Roam.
In this letter, I’ll be discussing some thoughts on the future of publishing in Roam and catching up on the latest #RoamCult community contributions.
- ## Around the Roaman Empire
    - ### Readwise
        - For those of you who use and love [Readwise](https://readwise.io/), they have released another improvement for syncing with Roam. You can now add indentation in the Roam export template, which is great for those (like me) who use nested [[Metadata]]; one less manual step needed.
            - More readwise improvements ((Cel1Yt-eR))
    - ### Roam Portal
        - [[Dharam Kapila]] has continued to improve Roam Portal with more visualisations to see how usage of pages and blocks over time change.
    - ### Roam42
        - [[Roamhacker]]'s [[Roam42]] plugin continues to go from strength to strength. First, [[Conor White-Sullivan]] __finally__ discovered it and was blown away! If you haven't explored it yet, I highly, highly recommend installing it. It adds so many nice touches that make using Roam far more usable, particularly if you use devices like an iPad.
        - The most recent update has cleaned up the menu interface, and there's a whole section of help and tutorials with quick lookups. Great if you want to find and learn a new keyboard shortcut.
            - (An aside, I try to learn one new trick each week as part of my [[1% Rule]] ((erSOpBJTf)))
        - One new feature, I'm particularly pleased to see is privacy mode, which was developed in conjunction with [[Robert Haisfield]]. It allows you to easily hide private parts of your Roam database, so that you can be more confident you won't accidentally reveal private or personal information. Rob has put a nice introductory video together which explains how it works and how to set it up. I hope it'll encourage more people to share how they use Roam.
            - {{[[youtube]]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1UR9dMR_k0&feature=youtu.be }}
    - ### Backups
        - If you've taken my [[Effective Note-Taking With Roam Research course]] in ((rLRRWhiRW)) I covered the importance of backups. It's worth backing up your Roam database as often as possible.
        - I use Matthieu Bizien's [Roam-to-Git](https://github.com/MatthieuBizien/roam-to-git) backup solution to do automatic hourly backup. But I also do manual exports for both Markdown and JSON during my weekly review. When it comes to backups, the [[Two Is One, One Is None]] rule firmly applies. The RoamStack team put together a [detailed step-by-step guide](https://www.roamstack.com/backups/) for both manual and the automatic solution if you need any help getting Matthieu's method working.
            - ((KWUnCK_NR))
        - The Roam team have added a third option to the export, **EDN**. It stands for Extensible Data Notation and it enables a lossless backup of your Roam graph. **I highly recommend using this format when you take a backup now**. Using only Markdown or JSON means that you could lose some data if the worst happened and you wanted to recreate your Roam graph.
    - ### Quality of Life improvements
        - Roam's weekly emails have become a little more sporadic the last couple of weeks, but there's been a few nice little improvements that I thought it's worth being aware of.
            - **Block embed**s are tidier - if you've used them you'll know that they jumped around a bit as you moused over them. It wasn't so clear where the blocks in the embedded block started and finished. Now there's a visual bar that you can click on to slide them in and out, and it works great if you love block inception and embed blocks in your embedded blocks. Conor put a [short Loom video together to demo it](https://www.loom.com/share/621971eca41d4b609305cb7026ba5d0a).
            - **Block References** - you surely won't have missed the new inline block references (by the way, `Shift-Click`ing them will open the references in the sidebar as it used to do) but there have been a few other nice improvements that have slipped in more quietly. Previously, if you accidentally merged a block which was referenced elsewhere they were left unusable. Now, the references are updated to point to the merged block. Similarly, if you delete a block with references in, instead of getting a confirmation dialog, the deleted references get replaced with the text of the block. It's akin to __Replace with -> Original__ being applied. It's worth pointing out that many of these kind of changes are really just a form of macro which Roam performs for you on the fundamental building blocks.
            - Finally, the other handy improvement which may have snuck in under your radar is the **multiple-block selection** menu. If you select several blocks and then right-click you'll see a menu of options you can perform on them all. There's a few more obvious copy/paste items, a very convenient sort feature and my particular favourites, "Copy Block Refs" and "Cycle TODO state". The block reference copy does the same as the copy operation but instead adds a block reference to the copied block instead, whilst the TODO cycler very quickly allows you to add a TODO to each selected block, or complete them all in a batch. It works on all blocks, no matter their nested level. Finally, the __Replace with__ let's you perform the operation on each one at once. This is useful when you have several block references you want to transform into their text equivalents. I often pull pages of block references together which I then want to export. This feature saves a ton of time.
- ## Thinking Out Loud
    - ### The future of Roam publishing
        - Over the last couple of weeks, there's been a burst of interest around publishing Roam formatted books and content. In addition to the usual ebook formats, [Luca Dellana](https://www.luca-dellanna.com) announced that his new book, __Ergodicity__, will also have a Roam version available (at extra cost). If you purchase it, you'll get an editable JSON export and access to a shared private uneditable graph.
        - Then last week, [[Sam Marfleet]] released his [public Roam graph](https://roamresearch.com/#/app/samlearns-public/page/FLb6tLe__) as a study guide to [[Joseph Campbell]]'s Hero's Journey. It paves the way for an exciting future. I can imagine subscribing to graphs of distilled knowledge on different subjects, where I can dive in at various points to explore themes and then be taken on journeys by other authors through the topics.
            - ((I4XUp24E_))
                - Sam Marfleets study guide
                    - ((4PQFDClmF))
        - I also had the pleasure of chatting with [[Francis Miller]] of [[RoamBrain]]. We were both quite excited about the possibilities that Roam could enable for the future of book publishing, especially for non-fiction authors. It opens the door to exploring information in new multi-dimensional ways where we're no longer constrained by the linear format of books. It also creates new challenges and opportunities to improve how knowledge can be imparted and taught.
        - Rounding out the week, I dropped in on the inaugural [[RoamStack]] Office Hours call, where we continued this theme. Since Roam encourages us to think at the block-level with single atomic ideas, we'll need to find ways to make the reading experience more natural. Books will often be filled with stories to illustrate concepts and have a narrative to lead you by the hand through the material, with the author as a guide. I often find myself crafting a story, but I struggle to keep blocks atomic while adding a connection to weave together the ideas in a way that is pleasing to read. In the end, I often resort to exporting the idea blocks into Ulysses where I'm free from the bullets and can more easily meld them together..
        - I'd love to hear and discuss more ideas around this subject. Should Roam stay as the source of notes and ideas with knowledge maps at different levels to explore the topic and source materials of the author, while books provide the narrative? Or could there be a future of distributed knowledge across many graphs, with the value in curation? You could access multiple interpretations and pathways through the material; perhaps making your own connections back to your graph along the way?
